CHATGPT.SH(1) v0.34 | General Commands Manual
mountaineerbr
January 2024

NAME

   chatgpt.sh -- Wrapper for ChatGPT / DALL-E / Whisper / TTS

SYNOPSIS

   chatgpt.sh [-cc|-d|-qq] [opt..] [PROMPT|TEXT_FILE]
   chatgpt.sh -i [opt..] [X|L|P][hd] [PROMPT] #dall-e-3
   chatgpt.sh -i [opt..] [S|M|L] [PROMPT]
   chatgpt.sh -i [opt..] [S|M|L] [PNG_FILE]
   chatgpt.sh -i [opt..] [S|M|L] [PNG_FILE] [MASK_FILE] [PROMPT]
   chatgpt.sh -w [opt..] [AUDIO_FILE] [LANG] [PROMPT]
   chatgpt.sh -W [opt..] [AUDIO_FILE] [PROMPT-EN]
   chatgpt.sh -z [opt..] [OUTFILE|FORMAT|-] [VOICE] [SPEED] [PROMPT]
   chatgpt.sh -ccWwz [opt..] -- [whisper_arg..] -- [tts_arg..]
   chatgpt.sh -l [MODEL]
   chatgpt.sh -TTT [-v] [-m[MODEL|ENCODING]] [INPUT|TEXT_FILE]
   chatgpt.sh -HHH [/HIST_FILE|.]
   chatgpt.sh -HHw

DESCRIPTION

With no options set, complete INPUT in single-turn mode of plain text
completions.

Option -d starts a multi-turn session in plain text completions. This
does not set further options automatically.

Set option -c to start a multi-turn chat mode via text completions and
record conversation. This option accepts davinci and lesser models,
defaults to text-davinci-003 if none set. In chat mode, some options are
automatically set to un-lobotomise the bot. Set option -E to exit on the
first response.

Set option -cc to start the chat mode via native chat completions and
defaults to gpt-3.5-turbo-0301, and may be set to use gpt-4 models.

Set option -C to resume (continue from) last history session.

Set option -q for insert mode. The flag “[insert]” must be present in
the middle of the input prompt. Insert mode works completing between the
end of the text preceding the flag, and ends completion with the
succeeding text after the flag. Insert mode works with model
gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct.

Positional arguments are read as a single PROMPT. Model INSTRUCTION is
usually optional and can be set with option -S.

In multi-turn, when user prompt begins with a colon “:”, the subsequent
text is set as a system message (text and chat cmpls). For text cmpls
only, if double colons “::” are used, the text following them will be
appended to the previous prompt.

With vision models, insert an image to the prompt with chat command
“!img [url|filepath]”. Image urls and files can also be appended by
typing the operator pipe and a valid input at the end of the text
prompt, such as “| [url|filepath]”.

If the first positional argument of the script starts with the command
operator and a history file name, the command “/session [HIST_NAME]” is
assumed. This will change to or create a new history file (with
options -ccCdHH).

Set model with “-m [MODEL]”, with MODEL as its name, or set it as “.” to
pick from the model list. List available models with option -l.

Set maximum response tokens with option “-NUM” or “-M NUM”. This
defaults to 1024 tokens.

If a second NUM is given to this option, maximum model capacity will
also be set. The option syntax takes the form of “-NUM/NUM”, and “-M
NUM-NUM”.

Model capacity (maximum model tokens) can be set more intuitively with
option “-N NUM”, otherwise model capacity is set automatically for known
models, or to 2048 tokens as fallback.

If a plain text file path is set as the first positional argument of the
script, the file is loaded as text PROMPT (text cmpls, and chat cmpls).

Option -S sets an INSTRUCTION prompt (the initial prompt) for text
cmpls, and chat cmpls. A text file path may be supplied as the single
argument. Also see CUSTOM / AWESOME PROMPTS section below.

Option -i generates images according to text PROMPT. If the first
positional argument is an IMAGE file, then generate variations of it. If
the first positional argument is an IMAGE file and the second a MASK
file (with alpha channel and transparency), and a text PROMPT
(required), then edit the IMAGE according to MASK and PROMPT. If MASK is
not provided, IMAGE must have transparency.

The size of output images may be set as the first positional parameter
in the command line: “256x256” (S), “512x512” (M), “1024x1024” (L) for
dall-e-2, and “1024x1024” (X), “1792x1024” (L) and “1024x1792” (P), for
dall-e-3. Dall-e-3 also accepts the “hd” parameter for image quality,
set it such as “Lhd”, or “1792x1024hd”. Defaults=1024x1024.

See IMAGES section below for more information on inpaint and outpaint.

Option -w transcribes audio from mp3, mp4, mpeg, mpga, m4a, wav, and
webm files. First positional argument must be an AUDIO file. Optionally,
set a TWO-LETTER input language (ISO-639-1) as the second argument. A
PROMPT may also be set to guide the model’s style, or continue a
previous audio segment. The text prompt should match the audio language.

Note that option -w can also be set to translate audio input to any text
language to the target language.

Option -W translates audio stream to English text. A PROMPT in English
may be set to guide the model as the second positional argument.

Set these options twice, e.g. -ww, and -WW, to have phrase-level
timestamps.

Combine options -wW with options -cc to start chat with voice input
(Whisper) support. Additionally, set option -z to enable text-to-speech
(TTS) models and voice out.

Option -z synthesises voice from text (TTS models). Set a voice as the
first positional parameter (“alloy”, “echo”, “fable”, “onyx”, “nova”, or
“shimmer”). Set the second positional parameter as the voice speed
(0.25 - 4.0), and, finally the output file name or the format, such as
“./new_audio.mp3” (“mp3”, “opus”, “aac”, and “flac”), or “-” for stdout.
Set options -vz to not play received output.

Option -y sets python tiktoken instead of the default script hack to
preview token count. This option makes token count preview accurate fast
(we fork tiktoken as a coprocess for fast token queries). Useful for
rebuilding history context independently from the original model used to
generate responses.

Stdin is supported when there is no positional arguments left after
option parsing. Stdin input sets a single PROMPT.

While cURL is in the middle of transmitting a request, or receiving a
response, <CTRL-C> may be pressed once to interrupt the call.

Press <CTRL-\> to exit from the script, even if recording, requesting,
or playing tts.

User configuration is kept at “~/.chatgpt.conf”. Script cache is kept at
“~/.cache/chatgptsh”.

A personal OpenAI API is required, set it with option -K. See also
ENVIRONMENT section.

The moderation endpoint can be accessed by setting the model name to
moderation (latest model).

See the online man page and script usage examples at:
https://github.com/mountaineerbr/shellChatGPT/tree/main.

For complete model and settings information, refer to OpenAI API docs at
https://platform.openai.com/docs/.

TEXT / CHAT COMPLETIONS

1. Text completions

Given a prompt, the model will return one or more predicted completions.
For example, given a partial input, the language model will try
completing it until probable “<|endoftext|>”, or other stop sequences
(stops may be set with -s).

Restart and start sequences may be optionally set and are always
preceded by a new line.

To enable multiline input, set option -u. With this option set, press
<CTRL-D> to flush input! This is useful to paste from clipboard.
Alternatively, set option -U to set cat command as prompter.

Type in a backslash “\” as the last character of the input line to
append a literal newline once and return to edition, or press <CTRL-V> +
<CTRL-J>.

Bash brackedted paste is enabled, meaning multiline input may be pasted
or typed, even without setting options -uU (v25.2+).

Language model SKILLS can activated, with specific prompts, see
https://platform.openai.com/examples.

2. Chat Mode

2.1 Text Completions Chat

Set option -c to start chat mode of text completions. It keeps a history
file, and keeps new questions in context. This works with a variety of
models. Set option -E to exit on response.

2.2 Native Chat Completions

Set the double option -cc to start chat completions mode. Turbo models
are also the best option for many non-chat use cases.

2.3 Q & A Format

The defaults chat format is “Q & A”. The restart sequence “\n Q: ” and
the start text “\n A:” are injected for the chat bot to work well with
text cmpls.

In native chat completions, setting a prompt with “:” as the initial
character sets the prompt as a SYSTEM message. In text completions,
however, typing a colon “:” at the start of the prompt causes the text
following it to be appended immediately to the last (response) prompt
text.

2.4 Voice input (whisper), and voice output (tts)

The options -ccwz may be combined to have voice recording input and
synthesised voice output, specially nice with chat modes. When setting
flag -w, or flag -z, the first positional paramenters are read as
whisper, or tts arguments. When setting both flags -wz, add a double
hyphen to set first whisper, and then tts arguments.

Set chat mode, plus whisper language and prompt, and the tts voice
option argument:

    chatgpt.sh -ccwz  en 'whisper prompt'  --  nova

2.5 GPT-4-Vision

To send an image, or url to vision models, either set the image with the
!img chat command with one or more filepaths / urls separated by the
operator pipe |.

    chatgpt.sh -cc -m gpt-4-vision-preview '!img path/to/image.jpg'

Alternatively, set the image paths / urls at the end of the text prompt
interactively:

    chatgpt.sh -cc -m gpt-4-vision-preview

    [...]
    Q: In this first user prompt, what can you see? | https://i.imgur.com/wpXKyRo.jpeg

2.6 Chat Commands

While in chat mode, the following commands can be typed in the new
prompt to set a new parameter. The command operator may be either “!”,
or “/”.

  Misc   Commands          
  ------ ----------------- --------------------------------------------------------
  -S.    -. [NAME]         Load and edit custom prompt.
  -S/    -S% [NAME]        Load and edit awesome prompt (zh).
  -Z     !last             Print last response json.
  !img   !url [FILE|URL]   Append image / url to prompt.
  !i     !info             Information on model and session settings.
  !j     !jump             Jump to request, append start seq primer (text cmpls).
  !!j    !!jump            Jump to request, no response priming.
  !r     !regen            Regenerate last response.
  !rep   !replay           Replay last TTS audio response.
  !sh    !shell [CMD]      Run shell, or command, and edit output.
  !!sh   !!shell [CMD]     Run interactive shell (with command) and exit.

  Script   Settings and UX   
  -------- ----------------- -------------------------------------------------------
  -g       !stream           Toggle response streaming.
  -l       !models           List language model names.
  -o       !clip             Copy responses to clipboard.
  -u       !multi            Toggle multiline prompter. <CTRL-D> flush.
  -uu      !!multi           Multiline, one-shot. <CTRL-D> flush.
  -U       -UU               Toggle cat prompter, or set one-shot. <CTRL-D> flush.
  -        !cat [FILE]       Cat prompter as one-shot, or cat file.
  -V       !context          Print context before request (see option -HH).
  -VV      !debug            Dump raw request block and confirm.
  -v       !ver              Toggle verbose modes.
  -x       !ed               Toggle text editor interface.
  -xx      !!ed              Single-shot text editor.
  -y       !tik              Toggle python tiktoken use.
  !q       !quit             Exit. Bye.
  !?       !help             Print a help snippet.

  Model   Settings          
  ------- ----------------- ---------------------------------------------
  -Nill   !Nill             Toggle model max response (chat cmpls).
  -M      !NUM !max [NUM]   Set maximum response tokens.
  -N      !modmax [NUM]     Set model token capacity.
  -a      !pre [VAL]        Set presence penalty.
  -A      !freq [VAL]       Set frequency penalty.
  -b      !best [NUM]       Set best-of n results.
  -m      !mod [MOD]        Set model by name, empty to pick from list.
  -n      !results [NUM]    Set number of results.
  -p      !top [VAL]        Set top_p.
  -r      !restart [SEQ]    Set restart sequence.
  -R      !start [SEQ]      Set start sequence.
  -s      !stop [SEQ]       Set one stop sequence.
  -t      !temp [VAL]       Set temperature.
  -w      !rec [ARGS]       Toggle voice chat mode (whisper),
                            optionally set arguments to whisper.

  Session   Management                     
  --------- ------------------------------ ------------------------------------------------------------
  -c        !new                           Start new session.
  -H        !hist                          Edit history in editor.
  -HH       !req                           Print context request immediately (see option -V),
                                           set -HHH to also print commented out history entries.
  -L        !log [FILEPATH]                Save to log file.
  !ls       !list [GLOB]                   List History files with name glob,
                                           Prompts “pr”, Awesome “awe”, or all files “.”.
  !grep     !sub [REGEX]                   Search sessions (for regex) and copy session to hist tail.
  !c        !copy [SRC_HIST] [DEST_HIST]   Copy session from source to destination.
  !f        !fork [DEST_HIST]              Fork current session to destination.
  !k        !kill [NUM]                    Comment out n last entries in history file.
  !!k       !!kill [[0]NUM]                Dry-run of command !kill.
  !s        !session [HIST_FILE]           Change to, search for, or create history file.
  !!s       !!session [HIST_FILE]          Same as !session, break session.

E.g.: “/temp 0.7”, “!modgpt-4”, “-p 0.2”, and “/s hist_name”.

2.6.1 Session Management

The script uses a TSV file to record entries, which is kept at the
script cache directory. A new history file can be created, or an
existing one changed to with command “/session [HIST_FILE]”, in which
HIST_FILE is the file name of (with or without the .tsv extension), or
path to, a history file.

When the first positional argument to the script is the command operator
forward slash followed by a history file name, the command /session is
assumed.

A history file can contain many sessions. The last one (the tail
session) is always read if the resume option -C is set.

If “/copy current” is run, a selector is shown to choose and copy a
session to the tail of the current history file, and resume it. This is
equivalent to running “/fork”.

It is also possible to copy sessions of a history file to another file
when a second argument is given to the command with the history file
name, such as “/copy [SRC_HIST_FILE] [DEST_HIST_FILE]”.

In order to change the chat context at run time, the history file may be
edited with the “/hist” command (also for context injection). Delete
history entries or comment them out with “#”.

2.7 Completion Preview / Regeneration

To preview a prompt completion before committing it to history, append a
forward slash “/” to the prompt as the last character. Regenerate it
again or flush/accept the prompt and response.

After a response has been written to the history file, regenerate it
with command “!regen” or type in a single forward slash in the new empty
prompt.

3. Prompt Engineering and Design

Minimal INSTRUCTION to behave like a chatbot is given with chat
options -cc, unless otherwise explicitly set by the user.

On chat mode, if no INSTRUCTION is set, minimal instruction is given,
and some options auto set, such as increasing temp and presence penalty,
in order to un-lobotomise the bot. With cheap and fast models of text
cmpls, such as Curie, the best_of option may be worth setting (to 2 or
3).

Prompt engineering is an art on itself. Study carefully how to craft the
best prompts to get the most out of text, code and chat cmpls models.

Certain prompts may return empty responses. Maybe the model has nothing
to further complete input or it expects more text. Try trimming spaces,
appending a full stop/ellipsis, resetting temperature, or adding more
text.

Prompts ending with a space character may result in lower quality
output. This is because the API already incorporates trailing spaces in
its dictionary of tokens.

Note that the model’s steering and capabilities require prompt
engineering to even know that it should answer the questions.

It is also worth trying to sample 3 - 5 times (increasing the number of
responses with option -n 3, for example) in order to obtain a good
response.

For more on prompt design, see:

-   https://platform.openai.com/docs/guides/completion/prompt-design
-   https://github.com/openai/openai-cookbook/blob/main/techniques_to_improve_reliability.md

See detailed info on settings for each endpoint at:

-   https://platform.openai.com/docs/

CODE COMPLETIONS (discontinued)

Codex models are discontinued. Use davinci or gpt-3.5+ models for coding
tasks.

Start with a comment with instructions, data or code. To create useful
completions it’s helpful to think about what information a programmer
would need to perform a task.

TEXT EDITS (discontinued)

Use gpt-4+ models and the right instructions.

ESCAPING NEW LINES AND TABS

Input sequences “\n” and “\t” are only treated specially in restart,
start and stop sequences (v0.18+)!

CUSTOM / AWESOME PROMPTS

When the argument to option -S starts with a full stop, such as “-S
.my_prompt”, load, search for, or create my_prompt prompt file. If two
full stops are prepended to the prompt name, load it silently. If a
comma is used instead, such as “-S ,my_prompt”, edit the prompt file,
and then load it.

When the argument to option -S starts with a backslash or a percent
sign, such as “-S /linux_terminal”, search for an
awesome-chatgpt-prompt(-zh) (by Fatih KA and PlexPt). Set “//” or “%%”
to refresh local cache. Use with davinci and gpt-3.5+ models.

These options also set corresponding history files automatically.

IMAGES / DALL-E

1. Image Generations

An image can be created given a text prompt. A text PROMPT of the
desired image(s) is required. The maximum length is 1000 characters.

2. Image Variations

Variations of a given IMAGE can be generated. The IMAGE to use as the
basis for the variations must be a valid PNG file, less than 4MB and
square.

3. Image Edits

To edit an IMAGE, a MASK file may be optionally provided. If MASK is not
provided, IMAGE must have transparency, which will be used as the mask.
A text prompt is required.

3.1 ImageMagick

If ImageMagick is available, input IMAGE and MASK will be checked and
processed to fit dimensions and other requirements.

3.2 Transparent Colour and Fuzz

A transparent colour must be set with “-@[COLOUR]” to create the mask.
Defaults=black.

By defaults, the COLOUR must be exact. Use the fuzz option to match
colours that are close to the target colour. This can be set with
“-@[VALUE%]” as a percentage of the maximum possible intensity, for
example “-@10%black”.

See also:

-   https://imagemagick.org/script/color.php
-   https://imagemagick.org/script/command-line-options.php#fuzz

3.3 Mask File / Alpha Channel

An alpha channel is generated with ImageMagick from any image with the
set transparent colour (defaults to black). In this way, it is easy to
make a mask with any black and white image as a template.

3.4 In-Paint and Out-Paint

In-painting is achieved setting an image with a MASK and a prompt.

Out-painting can also be achieved manually with the aid of this script.
Paint a portion of the outer area of an image with alpha, or a defined
transparent colour which will be used as the mask, and set the same
colour in the script with -@. Choose the best result amongst many
results to continue the out-painting process step-wise.

AUDIO / WHISPER

1. Transcriptions

Transcribes audio file or voice record into the set language. Set a
two-letter ISO-639-1 language code (en, es, ja, or zh) as the positional
argument following the input audio file. A prompt may also be set as
last positional parameter to help guide the model. This prompt should
match the audio language.

Note that if the audio language is different from the set language code,
output will be on the language code (translation).

2. Translations

Translates audio into English. An optional text to guide the model’s
style or continue a previous audio segment is optional as last
positional argument. This prompt should be in English.

Setting temperature has an effect, the higher the more random.

ENVIRONMENT

CHATGPTRC

CONFFILE

    Path to user chatgpt.sh configuration.

    Defaults="~/.chatgpt.conf"

FILECHAT

    Path to a history / session TSV file (script-formatted).

INSTRUCTION

    Initial initial instruction, or system message.

INSTRUCTION_CHAT

    Initial initial instruction, or system message for chat mode.

OPENAI_API_HOST

OPENAI_API_HOST_TEXT

    Custom host URL with an endpoint, or append a space to the end of
    the string to keep endpoint auto-selection.

OPENAI_KEY

OPENAI_API_KEY

    Personal OpenAI API key.

CLIP_CMD

    Clipboard set command, e.g. “xsel -b”, “pbcopy”.

PLAY_CMD

    Audio player command, e.g. “mpv –no-video –vo=null”.

REC_CMD

    Audio recorder command, e.g. “sox -d”.

VISUAL

EDITOR

    Text editor for external prompt editing.

    Defaults="vim"

COLOUR THEMES

The colour scheme may be customised. A few themes are available in the
template configuration file.

A small colour library is available for the user conf file to
personalise the theme colours.

The colour palette is composed of $Red, $Green, $Yellow, $Blue, $Purple,
$Cyan, $White, $Inv (invert), and $Nc (reset) variables.

Bold variations are defined as $BRed, $BGreen, etc, and background
colours can be set with $On_Yellow, $On_Blue, etc.

Alternatively, raw escaped color sequences, such as \e[0;35m, and
\e[1;36m may be set.

Theme colours are named variables from Colour1 to about Colour11, and
may be set with colour-named variables or raw escape sequences (these
must not change cursor position).

REQUIRED PACKAGES, OPTIONAL PACKAGES

-   Bash
-   cURL, and JQ

Optional Packages for Specific Features

-   Base64 - vision models
-   Imagemagick - image edits and variations
-   Python - tiktoken, Perl - only for option -HHHHH (clean history
    file)
-   mpv/SoX/Vlc/FFmpeg/afplay/play-audio (termux) - play TTS output
-   SoX/Arecord/FFmpeg/termux-microphone-record - record input, Whisper
-   xdg-open/open/xsel/xclip/pbcopy/termux-clipboard-set - open images,
    set clipboard

BUGS AND LIMITS

Garbage in, garbage out. An idiot savant.

REQUIREMENTS

An OpenAI API key. Bash, cURL, and JQ.

ImageMagick, and Sox/Alsa-tools/FFmpeg are optionally required.

OPTIONS

Model Settings

-@ [[VAL%]COLOUR], --alpha=[[VAL%]COLOUR]

    Set transparent colour of image mask. Def=black.

    Fuzz intensity can be set with [VAL%]. Def=0%.

-Nill

    Unset model max response (chat cmpls only).

-NUM

-M [NUM[/NUM]], --max=[NUM[-NUM]]

    Set maximum number of response tokens. Def=1024.

    A second number in the argument sets model capacity.

-N [NUM], --modmax=[NUM]

    Set model capacity tokens. Def=auto, fallback=4000.

-a [VAL], --presence-penalty=[VAL]

    Set presence penalty (cmpls/chat, -2.0 - 2.0).

-A [VAL], --frequency-penalty=[VAL]

    Set frequency penalty (cmpls/chat, -2.0 - 2.0).

-b [NUM], --best-of=[NUM]

    Set best of, must be greater than option -n (cmpls). Def=1.

-B [NUM], --log-prob=[NUM]

    Request log probabilities, also see -Z (cmpls, 0 - 5),

-m [MODEL], --model=[MODEL]

    Set language MODEL name. Def=text-davinci-003, gpt-3.5-turbo-0301.

    Set MODEL name as “.” to pick from the list.

-n [NUM], --results=[NUM]

    Set number of results. Def=1.

-p [VAL], --top-p=[VAL]

    Set Top_p value, nucleus sampling (cmpls/chat, 0.0 - 1.0).

-r [SEQ], --restart=[SEQ]

    Set restart sequence string (cmpls).

-R [SEQ], --start=[SEQ]

    Set start sequence string (cmpls).

-s [SEQ], --stop=[SEQ]

    Set stop sequences, up to 4. Def="<|endoftext|>".

-S [INSTRUCTION|FILE], --instruction=[STRING]

    Set an instruction prompt. It may be a text file.

-t [VAL], --temperature=[VAL]

    Set temperature value (cmpls/chat/whisper), (0.0 - 2.0, whisper
    0.0 - 1.0). Def=0.

Script Modes

-c, --chat

    Chat mode in text completions, session break.

-cc

    Chat mode in chat completions, session break.

-C, --continue, --resume

    Continue from (resume) last session (cmpls/chat).

-d, --text

    Start new multi-turn session in plain text completions.

-E, –exit

    Exit on first run (even with options -cc).

-g, --stream (defaults)

    Set response streaming.

-G, --no-stream

    Unset response streaming.

-i [PROMPT], --image

    Generate images given a prompt. Set option -v to not open response.

-i [PNG]

    Create variations of a given image.

-i [PNG] [MASK] [PROMPT]

    Edit image with mask and prompt (required).

-qq, --insert 

    Insert text rather than completing only. May be set twice for
    multi-turn.

    Use “[insert]” to indicate where the language model should insert
    text (gpt-3.5-turbo-instruct).

-S .[PROMPT_NAME][.], -.[PROMPT_NAME][.]

-S ,[PROMPT_NAME], -,[PROMPT_NAME]

    Load, search for, or create custom prompt.

    Set ..[PROMPT] to silently load prompt.

    Set .?, or .list to list prompt template files.

    Set ,[PROMPT] to edit a prompt file.

-S /[AWESOME_PROMPT_NAME]

-S %[AWESOME_PROMPT_NAME_ZH]

    Set or search for an awesome-chatgpt-prompt(-zh). Davinci and
    gpt3.5+ models.

    Set // or %% instead to refresh cache.

-T, --tiktoken

-TT

-TTT

    Count input tokens with python tiktoken (ignores special tokens). It
    heeds options -ccm.

    Set twice to print tokens, thrice to available encodings.

    Set model or encoding with option -m.

-w [AUD] [LANG] [PROMPT], --transcribe

    Transcribe audio file into text. LANG is optional. A prompt that
    matches the audio language is optional. Audio will be transcribed or
    translated to the target LANG.

    Set twice to get phrase-level timestamps.

-W [AUD] [PROMPT-EN], --translate

    Translate audio file into English text.

    Set twice to get phrase-level timestamps.

Script Settings

-f, --no-conf

    Ignore user configuration file and environment.

-F

    Edit configuration file with text editor, if it exists.

    $CHATGPTRC="~/.chatgpt.conf".

-FF

    Dump template configuration file to stdout.

-h, --help

    Print the help page.

-H [/HIST_FILE], --hist

    Edit history file with text editor or pipe to stdout.

    A history file name can be optionally set as argument.

-HH [/HIST_FILE], -HHH

    Pretty print last history session to stdout.

    Heeds options -ccdrR to print with the specified restart and start
    sequences.

    Set thrice to print commented out hist entries, inclusive.

-k, --no-colour

    Disable colour output. Def=auto.

-K [KEY], --api-key=[KEY]

    Set OpenAI API key.

-l [MODEL], --list-models

    List models or print details of MODEL.

-L [FILEPATH], --log=[FILEPATH]

    Set log file. FILEPATH is required.

-o, --clipboard

    Copy response to clipboard.

-u, --multi

    Toggle multiline prompter, <CTRL-D> flush.

-U, --cat

    Set cat prompter, <CTRL-D> flush.

-v, --verbose

    Less verbose.

    Sleep after response in voice chat (-vvccw).

    May be set multiple times.

-V

-VV

    Pretty-print context before request.

    Set twice to dump raw request block (debug).

-x, --editor

    Edit prompt in text editor.

-y, --tik

    Set tiktoken for token count (cmpls, chat, python).

-Y, --no-tik (defaults)

    Unset tiktoken use (cmpls, chat, python).

-z [OUTFILE|FORMAT|-] [VOICE] [SPEED] [PROMPT], --tts

    Synthesise speech from text prompt. Takes a voice name, speed and
    text prompt. Set option -v to not play response.

-Z, --last

    Print last response JSON data.
